# Project2Mashups
Mashups project 2

Description and Intended experience

For my second project I really wanted to work with sound waves and generally sound Visualization. I also found it super exciting and fascinating to look at how sound was visualized onto the computer screens with different color variations. I started searching online for some examples and saw that a lot of them were working with the D3 library, so I decided to work with it as well. I thought a lot on which sound and music API to use and eventually my choice came down to Soundcloud. Obtaining Spotify’s API was a bit complicated and I decided to settle with Soundcloud. Soundcloud has a pretty extensive list of the songs (mainly from young artists or remixes) and I think that the songs merged really well with the visualization. I also worked with Web Audio API and it was pretty challenging (more about it later). I wanted users to experience more than just listening to music and actually wanted to visualize all of it on the computer screen. I think it is very aesthetically pleasing and satisfying and is something that can be projected on bigger screens to make for even better experience.

Motivation and process for creating it

When Craig said that we had to work with visualization and visualizing a certain data, the first thing that I thought of was Music Visualization. Over the years I have seen many different works regarding sound visualization and was always really impressed by them and I knew that through this class I would have been able to do something similar. I also had another idea of working with Marvel API and doing something similar to what Bloomberg did with Star Wars, however, I wanted to switch from my Project 1 theme and do something different. Moreover, I didn’t want to work with a static data as I hadn’t encountered anything that was of particular interest to me. That is why after some thinking I ended up doing sound visualization. The process of creating the whole website was time-consuming, but at the same time really entertaining. Understanding Web Audio API was a bit hard and something I’ll talk more about in the “challenges” part; however, it was super interesting to see how much process and work is put into understanding the sound and then understanding how to visualize it. I also had an issue with Soundcloud API, as due to huge demand the system is/was down and I had to ask a fellow student at NYUAD to use her Client ID. Even though I encountered a lot of challenges when coding at the end of the day I was satisfied with what my end product was.

Design

I at first was not very worried with design part, as I wanted to make sure that all the technical parts were working perfectly. I knew that I wanted to have a pause/play button implemented and I wanted to give the users the opportunity to go through different songs, instead of having to re-type it. Soundcloud gives many search results for a specific title and with a simple button I am giving the users the opportunity to go through them. Initially, I also had waves in the background, however, the sound bars weren’t seen that well and as a result I decided to work with a black background. In the input holder I added a thinking emoji right before the text, it is a small detail, but I feel that it resembles the thought process of users when you ask them to “type their favorite song or artist”. If you don’t type anything in the search bar and click “enjoy”, a sign pops up stating “Please enter a song or artists name”. This was something that I hadn’t included in my first project and wanted to make sure that I had it here. Biggest thought process went into designing the colors of the bars, as I also have reflections. After some user testing, I got very mixed results. Some said only one colors, others said different colors and some suggested having shades of the same color. After tweaking the colors multiple times, I decided to settle on all the suggestions. First is the same colors, second song search is different colors and third and fourth are shades of the color (from top in the first case and from the bottom in the second case). After fourth song the color stays the same. Finally, I also added a Soundcloud icon as I am using their library. In case of stop and pause button I am using an if function and when button is clicked it switches from one image to another (images being the icons of stop and play). I thought of adding a volume bar to the whole design, however, I felt that everyone today usually controls the volume from their keyboard and thus I didn’t want to add another element to the website.

Major Challenges

One of the biggest challenges was understanding the Web Audio API and how the sound was transformed into visualization. I realized that I had to create multiple variables for the sound to first be initialized, then decoded, after making sure that the program was understanding the data and finally managing to deploy the sound that was both playable and had sound. I used a lot of help from the internet as people in the past have worked with Web Audio API. My next challenge came with the stop/pause button. When I created it first, the stop and pause button worked, however, it would always start the song over and over again. I wanted to make sure that once the song was stopped and then played again, it would start from the same point. I dived back into the internet to see how this was possible and realized that I had to create a variable where I would store the current data or current time of the music. I created two different variables (pauseNow, startNow) and managed to make the pause and start button work properly. I had to do some more research regarding how to change the button from “enjoy” to “next song”, but it ended up being pretty simple and just required a few lines of code. Working with D3 was pretty simple and straightforward and I actually really enjoyed working with it.

Next Steps
If will work again with sound visualization I want to work with p5 library. I heard that it is also really nice to work with sound visualization and maybe for future projects I will consider it. It will be also interesting to work with a static data and see how D3 or P5 visualizes it. Maybe in the future I could also give the opportunity to the users to change the colors of the bars to their taste.

References
For my project I used help from the Web Audio API website, where there were examples on documentation. Moreover, I used Soundcloud and their API for sounds and also W3Schools as reference for some codes. I want to thank Xin Tong as well for providing me with her Client ID for Soundcloud and for help from her previous sound visualization project. Stack Overflow was pretty helpful with some issues that I was facing. For images I used general Google images search. 

Links

Web Audio API - https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Web_Audio_API 

SoundCloud API - https://developers.soundcloud.com/docs/api/guide#authentication

Stack Overflow - https://stackoverflow.com/questions/44358480/how-to-make-an-audio-play-pause-button

W3Schools - https://www.w3schools.com/

Cynthia's project - https://github.com/CynthiaTong/Mashups-Projects/tree/master/Audio_Wave
